Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life. Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org. Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws. The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at http://pglaf.org For additional contact information: Dr. Gregory B. Newby Chief Executive and Director gbnewby@pglaf.org Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS. The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit http://pglaf.org While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach us with offers to donate. International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff. Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support. Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition. Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility: http://www.gutenberg.org This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm, including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks. The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Revolução Portugueza: O 31 de Janeiro (Porto 1891), by Jorge de Abreu This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org Title: A Revolução Portugueza: O 31 de Janeiro (Porto 1891) Author: Jorge de Abreu Release Date: July 22, 2009 [EBook #29484] Language: Portuguese *** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A REVOLUÇÃO PORTUGUEZA *** Produced by Pedro Saborano and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net BIBLIOTHECA HISTORICA (POPULAR E ILLUSTRADA) III A Revolução Portugueza O 31 DE JANEIRO *(Porto 1891)* POR JORGE D'ABREU [Ilustração da capa: bandeira do Centro Democratico Federal] 1912 EDIÇÃO DA CASA ALFREDO DAVID ENCADERNADOR _30-32, Rua Serpa Pinto, 34-36_ LISBOA BIBLIOTHECA HISTORICA (POPULAR E ILLUSTRADA) III A Revolução Portugueza O 31 DE JANEIRO VOLUMES PUBLICADOS I--HISTORIA DA REVOLUÇÃO FRANCEZA, por _F. Mignet_, 1.º volume. II--HISTORIA DA REVOLUÇÃO FRANCEZA, 2.º volume. III--A REVOLUÇÃO PORTUGUEZA--O 31 DE JANEIRO (PORTO 1891), por _Jorge d'Abreu_. NO PRÉLO IV--A REVOLUÇÃO PORTUGUEZA--O 5 DE OUTUBRO (LISBOA 1910), por _Jorge d'Abreu_. V--A REVOLUÇÃO E A REPUBLICA HESPANHOLA (1868 A 1874), por _Victor Ribeiro_. BIBLIOTHECA HISTORICA (POPULAR E ILLUSTRADA) A Revolução Portugueza O 31 DE JANEIRO (Porto 1891) POR JORGE D'ABREU Logotipo do editor 1912 EDIÇÃO DA CASA ALFREDO DAVID ENCADERNADOR _30-32, Rua Serpa Pinto, 34-36_ LISBOA Composto e Impresso na Imprensa Libanio da Silva==Travessa do Falla-Só, 24--Lisboa PALAVRAS DE UM SOLDADO *ao presidente do tribunal de guerra, no acto do julgamento:* ... _Eu, meu senhor, não sei o que é a Republica, mas não póde deixar de ser uma cousa santa. Nunca na egreja sentí um calafrio assim. Perdí a cabeça então, como os outros todos. Todos a perdemos. Atirámos então as barretinas ao ar. Gritámos então todos:--Viva! viva, viva a Republica!_... Do «Manifesto dos Emigrados da Revolução do Porto de 31 de Janeiro de 1891.» O 31 DE JANEIRO (Porto 1891) CAPITULO I O movimento de 31 de janeiro filia-se no "ultimatum" de 1890 A revolta militar de 31 de janeiro de 1891 caracterisou-se pela precipitação com que foi decidida e a pouca ou nenhuma reserva com que foi organisada. Durante mezes uma parte do paiz teve conhecimento quasi minucioso de que se conspirava contra a monarchia e que na conspiração entravam elementos de importancia recrutados